- Units
	- Bits, Bytes, Hexadecimal? 8 bits = 1 byte = 2 hex chars
	- MB vs Mb? 1 MB = 8 Mb
- Application/Presentation/Physical Layers
	- What is the application layer? Innermost payload, written in various application protocols (HTTPS, FTP, POP3 etc)
	- Presentation Layer. 3 functions? 1. Encryption 2. Compression/Decomp 3. Character encoding
	- PDU at physical layer? Bit
- Session Layer
	- Session Layer. 3 functions? 1. Comm start and end 2. Maintain auth from page to page 3. synch/checkpoints for sessions/downloads
	- Session Layer. 4 protocols? RPC, SIP, PPTP, NetBIOS
	- What is SIP? Session initiation protocol. Manages session for VoIP calls
	- What is RPC? Remote procedure call. Manages session for remote code exec
	- What is PPTP? Legacy VPN tunnels. Session layer
	- What is NetBIOS? Legacy suite of APIs for applications to communicate over LAN. Replaced by DNS & SMB bc unsecure
- Transport Layer
	- Transport Layer. PDU? tcp - segment. udp - datagram
	- Header fields in a TCP segment? 1. source & dest port 2. seq & ack # (for ordering segments) 3. flags (syn, ack) 4. window size 5. FCS
	- Transport Layer: What happens to inbound/outbound traffic? inbound: direct to application. outbound: add port number
	- What is Sliding Window Protocol? Transport layer function. Receiver telling sender to adjust transmission rate
	- What happens if CRC fails at Transport Layer? If datagram, just drop. If segment, drop then ACK wait timer will eventually expire, and sender will re-transmit.
	- 3 Types of applications which use UDP? Video streaming, VoIP, Online gaming
	- 9 Protocols which use UDP? DHCP DORA, SNMP Traps, NTP, DNS queries, TFTP, Syslog, IKE, RIP
	- TCP 3-way handshake to open? Client: SYN, Server: SYNACK, Client: ACK
	- TCP 4-way handshake to close? Client: FIN. Server: ACK, but still sending data. Server, FIN when done sending data. Client: ACK, wait 2 mins for a FIN re-send, then close
	- Max number of ports? 65535
	- TCP vs UDP. 3 things? TCP reliable, flow control (sliding window) and congestion control (ECN flag in IP header - explciit congestion notifc)
	- What is checksum? Data integrity check at the transport layer (end-to-end). Simpler than FCS/CRC
	- What happens if checksum fails? Segment dropped, Ack wait timer will eventually expire, sender will re-transmit segment.
- Network Layer
	- Header fields in IPv4 Packet? 1. Source & Dest Packet 2. Protocol 3. Fragmentation (id, flag, offset) 4. TTL 5. QoS 
	- Protocol values possible in IPv4 header? Transport (TCP, UDP), Management (ICMP, IGMP), Routing (RIP, EIGRP, OSPF, BGP)
	- Hop limit? Name for TTL in ipv6
	- Default TTL Values? macos/linux = 64 hops. windows = 128 hops.
	- What happens when TTL=0? Packet discarded, "ICMP time exceeded" sent back to sender.
	- What is IGMP? packets which manage multicast groups
	- What is ICMP? diagnostic messages, used by ping and traceroute
	- QoS use cases? High QoS: VoIP and video calls. Low QoS: software updates
	- QoS can be defined by what criteria? Application, user, or type of traffic
	- Devices which can set QoS? Routers, but also NGFW w deep inspection of packets
	- QoS Policing vs Shaping? Policing = dropping packets. Shaping = buffer and delay packets
	- QoS Queueing: FIFO vs PQ vs WFQ? 1. First in first out 2. Sort first by priority level, then fifo 3. Traffic in parallel, bandwidth divided by QoS weights.
- Data link Layer
	- Data link layer. 3 functions? 1. Direct to correct ipv4/6 protocol handler 2. Flow control (simple pause only) 3. FCS/CRC
	- Flow control: Transport vs Network vs Data link? Transport: Sliding Window. Network: ECN flag in ToS/QoS field. Data link: pause in EtherType field.
	- Breakdown of MAC address? first 24bits/3bytes = manufacturer. last 24bits/3bytes = device specific
	- What is SLAAC? device can give itself its own globally unique ipv6 by combining networks 64bit prefix (global unique) + its own MAC address, then doing DAD (duplicate address detection)
	- Why did we need ipv6 namespace? Every service, every VM on cloud, IoT, mobile devices, bluetooth devices
	- Types of frames at Data link layer? 1. Ethernet frames 2. Wifi frames 3. Cellular frames 4. PPP (i.e. dialup)
	- Header fields in ethernet frame? 1. Source & Dest MAC 2. EtherType 3. FCS
	- EtherType possible values? IPv4, IPv6, ARP, CDP, LLDP, Pause
	- EUI-48 vs EUI-64? 48bit/6hexadec vs 64bit/8hexadec
	- How to convert EUI-48 to EUI-64? Add "FF:FE" in the middle and flip 7th bit of 1st byte
	- Wifi: Authentication vs Association? Auth: I am allowed to access this network. Association: here is the identity assigned to you.
	- How does wifi do power management? Power bit in Wifi frame header. 1=I'm going to sleep. Buffer my data. 0=I'm awake, send me buffered data.
	- How does wifi do roaming? SSID and BSSID fields in wifi frame header. When signal gets weak, search for other BSSIDs with same SSID.
	- How does wifi do beaconing? WAPs  send beacon frames at regular intervals
	- What is wifi probing? A client actively searching for a specific SSID or broadcast asking for any SSIDs
	- What is CRC? Data integrity check at data link layer (per hop) More robust than checksum
	- Data integrity at transport layer vs data link layer? Transport: end-to-end. Data link: each hop. Transport: simpler check. Data link: more robust check.
	- MAC tables found on what devices? switches only
	- MAC tables map what to what? MAC address → switch ports
	- what happens if MAC address not found on MAC table? flood out all ports
- Protocols
	- File Sharing
		- FTP ports? 20 for data, 21 for control
		- SFTP vs FTPS? SFTP uses SSH. FTPS uses TLS/SSL
		- TFTP port? udp/69
		- What is TFTP? unsecure FTP. boot devices through the network (PXE)
		- What is SMB? shared drives and shared printers on windows. AKA CIFS
		- Linux version of SMB? NFS
		- NFS port? 2049 tcp or udp
		- SMB port? tcp/445
		- How does SMB Authenticate? Windows accounts / Active Directory
	- Remote
		- SSH port? tcp/22
		- Telnet port? tcp/23
		- RDP port? tcp/3389
	- Mail
		- SMTP port? 25-587
		- POP3 port? 110-993
		- IMAP port? 143-995
		- POP3 vs IMAP? download email from server vs sync email w server
	- Misc
		- MS-SQL port? tcp/1433
		- LDAP port? 389-636
		- 3 entities in LDAP? CN common name / users. OU = organizational unit / groups. DC = domain comonent / organization
		- HTTP vs HTTPS? HTTP stateless (uses cookies and session IDs) HTTPS encrypt+auth+integ with TLS/SSL
		- HTTP and HTTPS ports? 80 and 443
- VPNs and Cryptography
	- What is purpose of VPN? send private data over public networks
	- 5 steps of VPN? (0) GRE creates tunnel (1) IKE to authenticate w RSA (2) IKE symmetric key exchange w diffie-hellman (3) IPSec sends data encrypted with AES+sym key (4) IPSec integrity w SHA-256
	- Modes of VPN? Transport (encapsulate payload only, keep original IP header) vs Tunnel (encapsulate entire packet, add new IP header). ESP mode (auth, integ, encrypt) vs AH mode (auth and integ only)
	- IKE's algorithm and port? ISAKMP/diffie-hellman, udp/500
	- Digital signature: sender sends 3 things? 1. original data 2. digital signature = RSAencrypt(privateKey, SHA(data)) 3. digital certificate of public key
	- Digital signature: receiver does 2 things? 1. extract public key from digital certificate 2. check if RSAdecrypt(publicKey, digitalSignature) = SHA(data)
	- 2 obsolete hasing algos? MD-5, SHA-1
	- 2 symmetric encryption algos? 3DES (outdated), AES
	- Pros and Cons of Symmetric Encryption? less computationally expesnive, but sharing the key securely
	- 3 assymmetric encryption algos? RSA, Diffie-Hellman, ECC (for mobile)
	- TLS vs SSL? SSL is predecssor
	- TLS 4 steps? (1) authenticate each other (RSA+PKI) (2) securely set up symmetric key (diffie-hellman) (3) transfer encrypted data (AES+sym key) (4) integrity (SHA-256)
	- What is clientless VPN? browser-based VPN which requires no software installation, VPN to specific portals instead of entire network
	- What is a concentrator? does all the encryption and decryption for a VPN. maybe separate hardware, but often built into a firewalls software.
	- for VPNs, what is split vs full traffic? full = hides clients IP (seems coming from HQ) and more secure. split = faster and less resources used.
	- WEP vs WPA 1/2/3/? WEP insecure. WPA temporary stopgap. WPA2 AES, current standard, and added integrity. WPA3 AES, and SAE protect against brute force attacks
- Devices
	- Traditional FW vs NGFW? block by IP+port  vs.  block by application via deep inspection
	- Load balancer 5 functions? 1. TCP offload 2. TLS/SSL offload 3. Caching 4. QoS 5. Content-based switching
	- Proxy 4 functions? 1. Hide IP 2. cache pages 3. URL filtering 4. content scanning
	- Forward vs Reverse proxy? forward protects client, who is aware. reverse protects server, client is unaware.
	- NAS vs SAN? NAS = file-level = need to download whole file. SAN = block-level = can directly edit parts. single device vs network.
	- What is Wireless LAN controller? controls all WAPs (deploy changes simultaneously, monitor performance, monitor security)
	- What is access point? only translates between 802.3 ethernet and 802.11 wifi
	- What is a transceiver? for plugging light/fiberoptic into switches. multiplexer combines 
	- Transceiver speeds? SFP/SFP+/QSFP/QSFP+ = 1/10/4/40
- Cloud
	- What is CDN? geographically distributed duplicated data
	- What is transit gateway? connects multiple VPCs together in hub-and-spoke fashion. can also conenct to on-prem
	- What is VPC peering? just connecting 2 VPCs dirrectly
	- What is NAT gateway? instead of managing your own VM to act as NAT server in your VPC, the cloud provider handles NAT. scalable, flexible 
	- IaaS vs PaaS vs SaaS? renting hardware vs tools to develop without managing infra vs ready to use software usually through a browser
	- What is direct connect and advantages? dedicated fiber optic cable from AWS to on-prem network. faster and safer, but still need internal firewalls inside network.
	- What is IGW? where traffic goes between the internet and your VPC, performs NAT
	- IGW vs NAT gateway? IGW bi-directional gateway. NAT gateway is outbound only.
	- What is SASE? secure access service edge. replace firewalls, IPS/IDS, proxies in our data center with cloud-based software. SD-WANs, FWaaS, ZTNA
- Tools
	- What is a Loopback plug? Send signals back to itself. Test if NICs and ports.
	- Cable tester for? Testing continuity, i.e. correct wiring, open circuits, short circuits (but not signal strength)
	- Probe and Generator for? Identifying cables in a group. Only sends A signal, but no guarantee of proper wiring bc sends down ALL wires.
	- What is crimper? Attaches a raw ethernet cable to its connector
	- What is punchdown tool? Connects wires to patch panels or 110 blocks.
	- What is multimeter? checks voltage, continuity, and current on power related circuits
	- why does a probe and generator not test continuity? because ethernet has multiple wires, if 1 broken, you would still hear a tone.
	- What is a SPAN? software based port mirroring. send all traffic from 1 port to another. possible problem is oversubscription if receiving port's capacity exceeded
	- What is TAP? hardware based port traffic copying, but downtime to install, but can handle higher throughput.
- Casts
	- Examples of unicast? most traffic. HTTPS, SSH, etc
	- Examples of multicast? streaming, stock ticker info
	- What is the address to broadcast to everyone on 
	- Examples of anycast? DNS severs, CDNs
	- What is the broadcast address? Last address in subnet group ex. 192.168.1.255/24
	- What is 255.255.255.255? limited broadcast address, how to broadcast to your own subnet when you dont know own address, i.e. DNS discover.
	- 3 classes of multicast address? 224.0.0.x - local subnet multicasts. ex routing protocols. unamanged but standardized agreements on usage. 224.0.1.x - 238.x.x.x - global multicasts, managed by IANA, example: NTP. 239.x.x.x local LAN multicasts, managed by network admin.
	- What is anycast? Many devices all advertise the same public ip, when a packet reaches router, it just sends it to the shortest distance match. Conflicts are avoided mostly by a global database of BGP announcements to check legitimacy, no intrinsic authentication.
- Network Topologies
	- What is bus topology? single backbone. only one device transmit at a time
	- What are 2 advantages of mesh topology? more fault-tolerant, and load-balancing over different paths
	- what is spine and leaf topology? every device connects to 1 leaf, every leaf connects to every spine
	- 1 pro and 1 con of spine and leaf? predictable latency (always 1 switch away from all leaves) but complex as data center gets large
	- what is the three-tier topology? core (high speed transport), distribution (VLAN routing, QoS, ACLs), access (end devices)
	- in three-tier topology, what is key feature of core layer? speed (high capacity routers and switches) and reliability (redundant links)
	- advantages of spine-and-leaf vs three-tier? three-tier better for north-south (in and out of data center), and spine-and-leaf better for east-west (between devices in data center)
	- what is active-passive? network redundancy. if 1 device fails, other takes over.
	- what is active-active? both devices running, sharing load. if one fails, the other takes on whole load.
- WANs
	- What networks converged to make 4G? GSM and CDMA
	- What technology is 4G based on? GSM and EDGE
	- What is the speed of 4G LTE? 150 mbps down
	- What is the speed of 4G LTE-A? 300 mbps down
	- What is the theoretical speed of 5G? 10 gbps
	- How did 5G affect application development? Better to do computations in the cloud instead of device
	- What is the speed of Satellite? 100 mbps down, 5 mbps up
	- What is the typical latency of Satelllite? 500ms round trip
	- What are the 2 limitations of satellite? requires direct line of sight, and weather
	- What is MPLS? ISPs could set up private paths between branches and offices of an enterprise. the predecessor to SD-WANs.
- IEEE
	- What is 802.1D? Spannign tree protocol
	- What is 802.1W? Rapid spanning tree
	- What is 802.1Q? VLAN tagging
	- What is 802.1X? enterprise logging into networks and authentication
	- What is 802.3af? PoE
	- What is 802.3at? PoE+
	- What is 802.3bt? PoE++ type 3 or 4
	- What is 802.11? Wi-Fi
- Ethernet Cables
	- What is 802.3? Ethernet
	- When is it better to deliver ethernet over co-axial? When re-using existing coaxial infrastructure
	- Advantages fiber optic over twisted pair? bandwidth, >100m distance, no EMI, harder to tap
	- Advantages twisted pair over fiber optic? cheaper, PoE
	- MMF fiber optic max distance? less than 2km
	- SMF fiber optic max distance? up to 100km
	- fiber optic 3 connectors? LC, SC, ST (outdated)
	- Describe LC connector? push-pull latch
	- Describe SC connector? push-pull snap
	- Describe ST connector? bayonet
	- Describe BNC connector? twist on bayonet
	- Why 2 wires in twisted pair? differential signaling means EMI affects pos and neg signal equally, so we can negate out the noise
	- Why twist wires in twisted pair? common mode signaling. The noise on each cable is equal bc neither closer to the EMI
	- Why twist each pair at different rate in twisted pair? if all twisted at same rate, the EM fields from each pair would have same peaks and troughs
	- RJ-11 how many pins? 6p2c
	- RJ-45 how many pints? 8p8c
	- Co-axial connectors? F and BNC
	- describe F connector? threaded screw on
	- describe BNC connector? bayonet
	- pros and cons of twinaxial? faster than fiber (no conversion), faster than coaxial (less errors bc differential signaling), cheaper than fiber. CONS: only 5m
- Cables
	- What are common transceiver mismatches? single mode fiber transceivers must be used for single mode fiber cables. Also transeceiver wavelength must match cable's wavelength.
	- what is transceiver sensitivity? the minimum/quietest  signal it can receive without errors. It the transmitted power - total link less drops below sensitivity, there will be errors. 
	- in PoE, what is midspan vs endspan? endspan = power from switch. midspan = inline powr injector.
- Data centers
	- What is plenum? the airspace above a drop ceiling or below a raised floor
	- Which plenum is hot and cold? cold below, hot above
	- What is a plenum-rated cable? lowsmoke and fire resistant (teflon or low-smoke PVC)
	- What are the cons of plenum-rated cables? more expensive and less flexible
	- What is main concern in fiber optic distribution panels? bend radius
	- How wide are racks? 19 inches
	- How tall are racks? usually 42U
	- What is the purpose of punch down blocks and patch panels? To prevent signal reflection
	- What is ideal humidity? 40-60%
	- What is ideal temperature? 64-81 fahrenheit
	- What is risk of high humidity? corrosion
	- What is risk of low humidity? static discharge
	- What are 3 advantages of inert gas over chemical suppressants? cheaper, eco-friendly, doesnt degrade long-term
	- When to use carbon dioxide for fire suppression? harmful to humans, so industrial machines/unoccupied spaces.
	- What are 3 advnatages of chemical suprressants over inert gas? faster suppression, less storage space, safer for people
- Routing
	- Routing tables map what to what? longest matching prefix IP → egress interface + next hop IP
	- ARP tables map what to what? next hop IP addresses to MAC addresses
	- What happens when no matching IP address found on ARP table? send out ARP request broadcast
	- What happens when no matching IP address found on routing table? send to default gateway
	- How are routing table entries built up? Routing protocols like OSPF, EIGRP, etc
	- What are 3 types of routing protocols? distance-vector (only know next hop + total hop distance) vs link-state (know full toplogy) vs path-vector
	- What are 2 distance-vector routing protocols? RIP and IGRP (obsolete)
	- How does RIP routing protocol work? at each hop, look at your routing table to see where to go for next hop
	- What are 2 link-state routing protocols? OSPF and IS-IS (used by ISPs, dont need to know details)
	- 3 Cons of RIP vs OSPF? only chooses by hop count not bandwidth of each hop, slower convergence when network changes, and 15 hop max. 
	- What is EIGRP? Cisco's proprietary OSPF. hybrid between link-state and distance-vector. main feature is load-balances even over higher-cost routes
	- what is OSPF? open source link-state routing protocol. best route takes into account bandwidth of each path. can load-balance between equal-cost routes (called ECMP equal cost multiple paths)
	- how is OSPF built up? routers flood LSA (link-state advertisements) every 30m (or when a change) to all other routers (not just direct neighbors), and each router recalculates djikstras on entire topology.
	- how is RIP built up? routers periodically sned their routing table every 30s ONLY to their direct neighbors. 
	- what is BGP? also myopic and decntralized like RIP. instead of advertising ip addresses to direct neighbors, advertises IP ranges, along with the AS required to pass through to get there. Takes into account business and legal policies to determine "best" paths. 
	- Cisco route codes in routing tables? C (0 - directly connected) L (routers own address) S (1 - static), D (90 - EIGRP), O (110 - OSPF), R (120 - RIP), DHCP (254)
	- How to choose which entry in routing table? 1. longest matching prefix destination IP, then 2. tiebreak with Administrative Distances (ADs, i.e. 0=direct, 1=static, 90=EIGRP, etc), 3. then tiebreak with metrics
	- What is FHRP? in a routing table, the entry for the default gateway router is actually a virtual IP which can be repointed at multiple different routers, in case the primary router fails
	- 3 types of NAT? static NAT (1 private IP ↔ 1 fixed public IP), dynamic NAT (many private IPs temporarily use a pool of public IPs), and PAT/NAT overload (many private IPS share same public IP + different port numbers)
	- What is port forwarding? because of NAT, unsolicited inbound traffic doesnt know how to reach destination device. port forwarding rules tell this traffic where to go.
	- Disadvantage of using NAT? 
- IPv4 and IPv6
	- What is ipv4 loopback address? 127.x.x.x, but usually 127.0.0.1
	- what is ipv4 APIPA range? 129.254.x.y where x =/= 0 or 255
	- a CIDR subnet mask of /12 means what? 12 network bits, 20 host bits
	- 192 octet means? 11...
	- 11100000 means? 224
	- IPv6 is how many bits/bytes/hex? 128bits/16bytes/32hex
	- 3 ways to make ipv4 and ipv6 work togehter? tunneling, dual-stack, and translation
	- what is ipv6 tunneling? 6in4. put ipv6 inside ipv4 packet, but (1) requires special relay routers to de-capsulate and (2) doesnt work with NAT. 
	- what is ipv6 4in6? a tunnel method which is rare because usually the challenge is crossing older infrastructure which only supports ipv4
	- what is ipv4 dual-stack? every device and router from beginning to end have both ipv4 and ipv6 addresses. 
	- what is ipv6 translation? uses NAT64 and DNS64 to map ipv6 to a ipv4 address +port so that ipv6 devices can use older ipv4 services.
	- what is SLAAC? ipv6 devices dont require a DHCP server, they assign themselves a ipv6 addresss. network prefix + MAC address (with `ff:fe` in the middle + flip 7th bit)
	- in ipv6, What is DAD? duplicate address detection. send out NS (neighbor solicitation) to `ff02::1:ffXX:XXXX` using last 24 bits, a multicast group for all addresses ending in 'XX:XXXX' are subscribed to. if conflict, they reply with NA (neighbor advertisement)
	- in ipv6, what is RS/RA? router solicitation and advertisement. replaces DHCP. `ff02::2` is a fixed multicast group address that all routers are subscribed to. hosts send RS to that address to find routers. 
	- who assigns the DHCP For the entire network? the DHCP
	- what happens if a subnet mask is too short? mistakenly sees destinations as internal, ARP broadcasts to find a destination, finds none, drops
	- what happens if a subnet mask is too long? mistaken sees destinations as external, sends packets which should go locally to default gateway
	- can reach some local hosts, but not others. is subnet mask too long or too short? too short. because i am trying to send to non-existent local hosts
- VLANs
	- how do VLANs work? switch ports are each assigned to exactly 1 VLAN, creating separated layer2 broadcast domains.
	- when is a 802.1Q tag added to the frame header? if the frame needs to cross a trunk (connecting 2 switches, or switch to router)
	- how many possible VLANs? 2^12 = 4094 (minus 2)
	- What is VXLAN? (original ethernet frame + VXLAN header) = payload ⊆  UDP datagram ⊆ IP packet ⊆  ethernet frame. the outer 3 layers will be added on by the first VTEP, and stripped off by hte final receiving VTEP.
	- What is VTEP? the functionality in switches in routers which allows them to handle VXLANs
	- how many VXLANs possible? 2^24 = >16million
	- 2 separate data centers, but want common subnets. solution? VXLANs can stretch broadcast domains even across layer 3 networks
	- What is SDWAN? software defined WAN. connecting physically separated LANs behave as if htye were a single network usually using tunnels, which are usually IPSec and GRE.
	- What is VTP? Cisco's VLAN management which dynamically creations, deletes, and renames VLANs
	- What is DTP? Dynamic trunking protocol. A feature which automatically determines if a switch port should be a access port or a trunk port. is a security risk for switch spoofing AKA VLAN hopping
	- What is router on a stick? Inter-VLAN routing via an external router using subinterfaces on a trunk link
	- what is SVI? switched virtual interface. Inter-VLAN routing done internally by a Layer 3 switch via virtual interfaces for each VLAN. scale better than router on a stick. 
	- What is native VLAN? for each trunk, 1 particular VLAN is designated as the native VLAN, and that traffic when sent across trunks, instead of having its particular tag, is sent untagged.
	- What are subinterfaces? between a switch and a router, if we have multiple VLANs, we need a separate cable for every VLAN. subinterfaces allow a single router to be the default gateway for multiple VLANs simultanesouly.
	- How to deal with voice and data contention? separate them into VLANs
	- on switches, what are access ports? belong to single VLAN, connect to end-devices, only send and receive untagged frames EXCEPT some ports accept frames with native VLAN tag. incoming: add VLAN Tag. outgoing: strip VLAN tag. 
	- on swithces, what are trunk ports? connecting switches to switches/routers, carry tagged traffic for multiple VLANS except for the native VLAN's traffic, which is sent untagged.
- Interface settings
	- what are 3 settings on ALL interfaces? speed, duplex, MTUs
	- If cable links 2 interfaces with mismatched speeds? no link at all.
	- if cable links 2 interfaces with mismatched duplex? works but poorly. collisions, FCS errors, retransmissions
	- if cable links 2 interfaces iwth MTU mismatch? large transfers fail, i.e. web pages half load, file transfers stall
	- what is MTUs? largest packet size that can go through interface.
	- What is standard MTU size? 1500 bytes
	- What is jumbo frame MTU size? typically 9000 bytes
	- What are downsizes of jumbo frames? every device on path must use jumbo frames
	- what are 4 settings on SWITCH ONLY interfaces? LACP, VLAN membership, PoE, port security
	- What is LACP? mostly used between 2 switches to see 2 cables as a single cable
	- What happens when LACP misconfigured? loops and braodcast storms
	- What happens with PoE settings wrong? device doesnt power up or repeatedly reboots
	- What are 3 ways interface can be down? admin down, error-disabled (port security violation, broadcast storms, link flapping), suspended (LACP configed wrong, VLAN mismatch)
	- In interface, damaged pins vs dirty/corroded contacts? damaged = no connection at all or lower speed than expected. dirty/corroded = lots of drops and crc errors
- Spanning Tree
	- What is 802.1D? spanning tree protocol
	- What is 802.1W? rapid spanning tree protcol
	- How fast do STP and RSTP converge? 30s and 6s
	- What are the time intervals in STP? every switch sends out BPDUs every 2 seconds. When neighbors miss BDPUs for 20s, it assumes a topology change
	- What are 3 criteria for determining root bridge in STP? BID (priority number), then tiebreaks by VLAN, then tiebreaks by MAC
	- What is a BDPU? in STP, every switch sends out (1) its own Bridge ID and (2) the Bridge ID of who it believes the current root is (3) and its cost to that currently supposed root
	- What is are the state variables of a switch in STP? (1) who the root is (2) its cost the reach the root and (3) the way to the root AKA the root port
	- What determines cost to the root bridge in STP? bandwidth. 10mb/100mb/1gb/10gb = 100/19/4/2 cost 
	- In STP, how does a switch determine designated ports vs non-designated/blocking ports? listen to neighbors BDPUs. If a neighbor advertises a better path to the root, your port facing that neighbor is Blocking. if a neighbor advertises a worse path to the root, your port facing that neighbor is designated/forwarding.
	- What are the listening/learning/forwarding states in STP? 15s each. first only listening BDPUs. then add in learning MACs. then add in forwarding traffic
	- What is discarding state in RSTP? combined blocking + listening + disabled states
	- What are alternate and backup ports? in RSTP only. both blocked. alternate = another way to the root. backup = when 2 side-by-side cables from the same hub to same switch. only 1 being used. 
- Wireless
	- what is LWAP? lightweight access points. doesnt do any auth, roaming, or packet forwarding. Just tunnels traffic to the WLC.
	- What is WLC? the wireless LAN controller. the central brain that access points connect to.
	- What are autonomous APs? standalone access points, each with their own SSED, security policies, etc.
	- What are the benefits of using WLC+LWAP over autonomous APs? centralized control (configure/deploy changes), performance and securtiy monoitoring, roaming, load balancing, bandwidth shaping
	- What does a yagi antenna look like? christmas tree
	- What does a parabolic antenna look like? concave
	- What does a patch antenna look like? flat and square
	- What is bad placement of an omnidirectional antenna? in a corner
	- describe coverage of yagi antenna? directional like a wide flashlight beam. from building to building.
	- describe coverage of parabolic antenna? highly directional like a laser pointer. over kilometers
	- describe coverage of patch antenna? wide and short. like a floodlight
	- what is ESSID? name for many access points stitched together
	- What is IBSS? independent basic service set. AKA adhoc mode. there is no central access point. all clients talk directly to eahc other, peer-to-peer, every station is both a host and network service.
	- how is IBSS differnet from mesh? mesh can forward packets. IBSS is direct p2p only.
	- What are the 3 characteristics of a wave? amplitude, frequency, and phase.
	- What does ISM stand for? industrial, scientific, medical
	- Name the RF spectrum regulating bodies? ITU (international. this range is ISM, this range is mobile networks, this range is satellite), IEEE (these are bands and channels for wifi), 3GPP (these are LTE bands, these are 5G bands), FCC (this band is unlicenses, this band was auctioned to verizon)
	- What is 802.11h? to stop interference with military, weather, and air control. DFS = switch to another channel. TPC = reduce power
	- for 5Ghz wifi, what are tradeoffs of channel width? higher channel width = faster speeds bc more bandwidth. less channel width = more non-overlapping channels (use in crowded buildings)
	- What is band steering? force dual-band clients to use 5Ghz over 2.4Ghz
	- What other devices share and crowd 2.4Ghz? microwaves, bluetooth, etc.
	- what is CSMA/CA? carrier sense multiple access. how many overlapping wireless networks can all talk without colliding
	- why does device keep dropping from wireless network? DOS attack via forged de-authentication frames
	- why can roaming between APs fail? inconsistent configs (security settings, encryption type, passphrase, same authentication backend, same VLAN settings)
- IT support
	- What is EOL? security updates continue, but no new features.
	- What is EOS? no more security updates.
	- What is SLA? service providers contract about uptime, response time, performance metrics, and penalties
	- What is IPAM? software which is central console for DHCP server, DNS server, and IP address tracking
	- What are the pros of using asset management? to refer to in trouble tickets, to keep track of when warranties end, to track financial depreciation, inventory visibility
- SNMP/LLDP/NTP
	- SNMP Port? udp/161 for managers udp/162 by agents for traps
	- SNMP Polling vs Traps? request from manager vs unprompted alerts from agents
	- in SNMP, what is utilization? % throughput/bandwidth
	- in SNMP, what can cause CRC errors? frame corruption due to cabling, EMI, or duplex mismatch
	- in SNMP, what is a runt error? Smaller than 64 byte ethernet frame min. caused by cabling, collisions
	- in SNMP, what is a giant error? Frame larger than 1518 byte ethernet frame max. caused by misconfigured MTU, or bad NICs
	- in SNMP, what causes packet drops? congestion/buffer overflow, VLAN tags on access ports
	- What is MIB? mapping between OIDs and diagnostic data on a device, used by SNMP
	- What is OID? numerical code used as inuts into MIB to return diagnostic data. 1.3.6.1...
	- SNMP v2 and v3 improvements? v2 added bulk transfers. v3 replaced plain-text community strings with USM, which ensures traps delivered
	- What is LLDP and CDP? layer 2 protocol where devices share identity with directly connected neighbors to help admins build a descriptive view of the network topology.
	- Whats LLDP CLI command? show cdl/lldp neighbors
	- What is NTP? syncrhonize times on all devices
	- what port is NTP? udp/123
	- What is NTS-KE? a separate server from NTP server which handles millions of authentication requests per second. Gives a cookie to client to provide to NTP server
	- What is PTP? precision time protocol, more accurate version of NTP, hardware-based.
- Logs
	- What is Netflow? collects data about network traffic
	- In Netflow, what is a conversation? any exchange of data between 2 IP endpoints
	- 3 examples of common metrics in Netflow? top conversations, top endpoints, top applications
	- What is a protocol analyzer? packet sniffer
	- How do we usually capture packets for packet sniffers? port mirroing, Taps, inline IDS, router/firewalls
	- cons of capturing packets via port mirroring/taps/inline IDS/firewalls? port mirroring = uses switch's resources, drops packets under load.  taps = setup downtime. inline IDS = larger network so latency and bottlenecks. router/firewall = small buffer so only capture short bursts.
	- Syslog port? udp/514
	- What is syslog? Devices sending event and log messages to a SIEM
	- What is SIEM? collects syslog data. makes reports, dashboards. Detects security incidents in real time
	- What to do if SIEM overwhelmed? only store warning and urgent. discard informational.
	- Advantage of APIs over SSHing into devices? batch processes, configure multiple devices, interact with cloud services and firewalls, etc
- DNS
	- DNS port? udp/53
	- instead of DNS, how can a computer manually resolve domain names? hosts file
	- how to do DNS forward lookup? `dig name`. name → IP
	- how to do DNS reverse lookup? `dig -x ip` IP → name
	- What are parts of FQDN? www/mail/server = host name. website.com = domain name. trailing `.` = DNS root
	- 3 types of DNS security? DNSEC, DoT (TLS/SSL), DoH (HTTPS)
	- in DNS, what is a CNAME record? maps hostname to another hostname. alias.
	- in DNS, what is a MX record? domain name → hostname of of mail server for that domain
	- in DNS, what is NS record? domain name → hostname of authoritative DNS server for that domain
	- in DNS, what is SOA? domain ZONE → authoritative DNS, admin's email, last updated, TTL etc
	- in DNS, what is TXT? domain name → SPF (ip addresses who can send email w this domain name), DKIM (public keys for digital signatures), DMARC (what to do when fail above)
	- in DNS, what is SRV? service + protocol + domain → hostname + port
	- in DNS, what is PTR? ip address → hostname
	- in DNS, what is PTR usually used for? check if email really came from the domain it claims
- DHCP
	- DHCP port? udp/67 request, udp/68 replies
	- DHCP exclusion vs reservation? exclusion = device will give itself a static IP, so dont DHCP it out to anyone. reservation = device will ask DHCP for an IP, always give it this same one.
	- DHCP DORA process? discover (broadcast is anyone out there?) offer (all DHCPs reply i have this one available). request (broadcast out i have chosen this one) acknowledge (here is lease for that address)
	- What is DHCP helper/relay? to let DHCP DORA messages cross routers (which are broadcast boundaries)
	- What is BOOTP? predecessor to DHCP. how devices found their IPs, but not dynamically.
	- When do DHCP leases renew? T1 at 50% of lease time, just check in. T2 at 87.5%, if no DHCP responded in T1, try to find new DHCP.
	- What are other things DHCP assigns besides IP address? subnet mask, DNS server, default gateway, call server (for VoIP), HTTP proxy
	- What are 5 central managers? SNMP, WLC, DHCP/IPAM, Syslog/SIEM, RADIUS/TACACS+
- Security
	- What is AES? symmetric encryption only. no auth or integ. Used by TLS and IPSec
	- What is TLS? encrypt + auth + integ at application layer. used by HTTPS, VPNs
	- What is SSL? predecessor to TLS
	- What is IPSec? encrypt + auth + integ at internet layer.. Used by VPNs
	- What is RSA? assymmetric encryption algorithm that creates digitial signatures of data using a private key, and can be verified using a public key.
	- Digital signatures: calculation done by sender? digital signature = RSAencrypt(privateKey, SHA256(data))
	- Digital signatures: calculation done by receiver? check if RSAdecrypt(public key, digital signature) = SHA256(data)
	- What is the purpose of CA? To vouch for the authenticity of the public key in digital signatures.
	- What is zero trust? never trust, continuously re-verify
- Identity management
	- What is an IAM? Ways to control AAA connecting right users to right resources. things like RADIUS and TACACS and LDAPS.
	- What is RADIUS? a AAA protocol used for firewalls, VPNs, WAPs to talk with an AAA server. Think "logging in"
	- What is TACACS+? a AAA protocol used mostly for admin logins onto network devices.
	- 4 differences btw RADIUS and TACACS+? udp/tcp, encrypt password/full payload, network-access only vs command-level authorization, open/CISCO
	- What is AAA? authen, author, accounting (logging what a user does)
	- What is MFA? something know (password, pin), something have (OTPs, phone), something you are (face, fingerprint)
	- Best practice for ACLs? more specific rules go at the top
	- Last entry for ACL? deny everything else that did not match any other criteria
	- Common criteria for ACLs? source/dest IP, source/dest port, time of day
	- What are security zones? in firewall rules / ACLs, instead of using IP address ranges, use zones like internal, external, servers, DMZ (publically accessible) etc
	- What is ABAC? attribute based access control, more refined than RBAC. user attributes, resource attributes, attempted acction (rwx), location, time of day
	- ABAC vs policy-based? user/resource/time = abac. firewall rule, more blanket statements = policy-based
	- What is CIA? the goals of security. confidentiality, integrity, availability.
	- What is SAML? instead of authenticating with the Slack, Salesforce (AKA service provider), you authtenticate with a identity provider (okta, Microsoft AD) who gives you a XML token to give back to the SP.
	- Whati is OAuth? instead of authenticating with the service provider (Reddit, Github, Spotify), you authenticate with an identity provider (Google, Facebook, Apple) who gives you a JSON token to give back to the SP.
	- SAML vs Oauth? SAML better for websites, OAuth better for mobile
	- What is SCADA? a type of ICS typically used for electric grids, pipeline networks, water systems, traffic lights
	- What are examples of network segmentation? Guest wifi networks, BYODs on separate VLAN or subnet
	- What is MDM? Software solution for BYOD. able to encrypt device, push updates, remote wipe clean.
	- What is KMS? software (aws, azure) or hardware chips (HSMs) or standalone KMS servers logs usage of keys, regularly rotates, etc.
	- What is 802.1X? the port-based standard for NAC (network access control). The switch or AP stays closed until AAA complete. Usually means using RADIUS to do AAA.
	- What are 4 alternatives to 802.1X? open network, PSKs, MAC address filtering (weak), captive portals (weak, just blocking internet at application layeR)
- Command Line
	- What does nmap do? find open ports and services running on devices
	- What is windows version of traceroute? tracert
	- What does the command traceroute do? tells all routers between source and destination using TTL=1,2, etc
	- CLI command to lookup a domain name's IP? nslookup
	- CLI command to look up a domain's MX or NS? dig
	- CLI command to inspect packets? tcpdump
	- What is windows version of tcpdump? windump
	- CLI command to see all active connections? netstat
	- what is ipconfig/ifconfig? what is the local ip address of this device
	- what problems can ipconfig diagnose? APIPA address → DHCP failed. DNS settings wrong → cant conenct to sites. default gateway wrong so cant reach outside internet.
	- CLI command to view local arp table? arp -a
	- what does ping test? can i reach this host at all?
	- How to check if your OS's TCP/IP stack is working? ping 127.0.0.1
	- How to check if your NIC is working? ping your own ip address
	- What does it mean if you cant ping your router/gateway IP? wifi, vlan, DHCP
	- SSHed into device. CLI command to check interface settings? show interface
	- SSHed into device. CLI command to see mac tables and routing tables? show mac-address-table and show route
	- What information does `show interface` give? is port up, down, disabled, duplex, speed, MTU, various errors
- Remote
	- What is RDP? microsoft's remote desktop GUI
	- What is VNC? open source versio nof microsoft's RDP
	- What is console port? gain access to device's terminal directly, even if no IP network, NIC malfunction
	- What is a jump server? SSH/VPN into the jump server first, then you can RDP/SSH into many devices
- Power
	- What devices can store charge even when unplugged? CRT monitors, laser printers
	- Watts, volts, amps? watts = volts x amps
	- AC vs DC? AC is better over long distances, devices use DC
	- What is UPS? uninterruptinle power supply. in case of power outages, allows for graceful shutdown
	- 3 types of UPS? standby/offline = switch on if power fails. line-interactve = add voltage regulation i.e. brownouts. online/double conversion = always running off battery
	- Brownouts vs Surges? voltage drops vs voltage surges
- Misc
	- RTO vs RPO? RTO = time. RPO = how much data lost during outage. 
	- What is GDPR? data of EU citizens must stay in EU, they can remove their data
	- What is PCI DSS? protects credit card information